In recent years, Alzheimer’s disease, a disease that targets the patient’s cognitive abilities and causes dementia, has become increasingly prevalent among the older population. Clinical practice today diagnoses the disease through MRI imaging and cognitive tests based on individual doctor’s personal experience. This reliance on varying doctoral experiences poses a huge challenge during its early stages when the symptoms are subtle and hard for clinicians to discern. As a result, many elderly today are only diagnosed when the disease has already progressed into a later, much more obvious stage, significantly reducing their chance of receiving effective treatments. In our work, we applied a novel method in Alzheimer’s disease early diagnosis. Our unprecedented method uses a state-of-the-art image recognition model, a Vision Transformer (ViT), combined with a saliency map, Grad-CAM, to increase interpretability and alleviate the black box issue in the predicted results. We trained the ViT with ADNI imaging datasets and conducted similar experiments with other popular models for machine learning as baselines for performance comparison. The results show that our model has delivered the best performance out of all traditional methods, with an astonishing 99\% accuracy. Compared to an average accuracy of 96\% by other commonly used models for data prediction, our method has improved the final prediction accuracy to 3 standard deviation range, thereby accounting for almost all the possible outliers. These breakthroughs, paired with the website we created to increase the model’s reach, will prove to be a revolutionary contribution to the field of Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis.


Through this research, we have made the following contributions:
\begin{itemize}
    \item We identified a new significant problem within the medical field
    \item We applied a novel method using a state-of-the-art deep learning model (ViT) in Alzheimer's disease prediction and analyzed its ability in diagnosing early Alzheimer's given MRI scan images. 
    \item We solved the challenge of lack of interpretability through applying the Grad-CAM method, allowing the
    model to assist doctors to make decisions in real world diagnosis and applications.
    % A deep learning framework for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis. outperform previous methods (accuracy,? )
    \item We modelled and compared other traditional methods of disease prediction, showing the different results and drawing conclusions for applicability. 
